Env1_sdm1, Mesic warm coastal lichenfields. Primarily occurs on flat, rocky coastlines or low outcrops, which have frequent cloud cover and may receive thick seasonal snow cover. Exposure to meltwaters is higher than other ecosystem types in the group. The dominant biota include several lichen species. Includes areas suitable for penguin colonies (Gentoo, Chinstrap), except where adjacent to ice shelves.

Env1_sdm2, Dry coastal lichen fields. Primarily occurs on flat, rocky terrain or low outcrops on cold, dry and windy coastlines, commonly (but not exclusively) adjacent to ice shelves. Characteristic biota includes sveral tardigrade, rotifer and arthopods taxa recorded primarily from this unit. Nutrient fluxes potentially influenced by Emperor penguin colonies on adjacent ice sheets.

Env1_sdm3 Mesic coastal lowlands. Rocky lowlands in warm, cloudy mesic areas support a biota dominated mainly by lichens, mosses and seabirds. Colonies of penguins on the lower slopes and nesting seabirds influence moss beds upslope enriched by nutrients via updrafts. Grasses occur occasionally within this system at low elevations on the Antarctic Peninsula and associated islands, but not in other areas. The microbiota is likely to exhibit strong regional variation within this unit around the continent.

Env1_sdm4 Xeric valley floors. Flat or rolling valley bottoms typically carved by antecedent glaciers and surrounded by valley sides and high peaks. The valleys may extend many kilometres inland and are relatively sheltered from the wind and extremely dry, but often contains lakes maintained by meltwater streams. Some incidence of this unit also seen between the edge of existing glaciers and steep mountain slopes. These systems are colder than the rest of the lowlands, but still warmer than the continental average. The vegetation is sparse due to extremely dry conditions, which are largely unsuitable for mosses, and instead characterised by algae, Stereocaulid lichens with nematodes and trombidiformid mites, rotifers and springtails.

Env1_sdm5 Subcoastal mossy rises [cf. terraces/ridges]. These moss-dominated ecosystems occupy low-relief rocky outcrops, usually in the subcoastal hinterlands, extending to higher elevations than other coastal ice-free terrestrial ecosystems, although some are quite close to the coastline. Conditions are sufficiently warm and sunny to promote moss growth, but somewhat cooler and windier than other coastal systems in Group 1. Several processes are likely to enhance habitat suitability for mosses by promoting nutrient enrichment. Many occurrences co-incide with abandoned penguin colonies that were active earlier in the Holocene when sea levels were higher than at present. Toxic nitrogen levels associated with active colonies have since been leached, while residual levels of N and other nutrients promote moss growth. Alternatively, more elevated sites receive nutirent influxes from nesting seabirds or aerosol inputs via updrafts from extant penguin colonies below. While mosses are conspicuous features of these systems, lichens and some nematodes are also widespread, and several cyanobacteria species are characteristic of occurrences in different regions of the continent.

Env2_sdm1 Rugged mesic coastal mountains. Occurs mainly in the rugged areas of Alexander and Adelaide Islands on the peninsula with some outliers elsewhere. Maritime influence makes these systems warmer and wetter than others within the Env2 group, and they also have greater relief and higher exposure to meltwater at lower elevations. Sampled biota includes mainly common lichen and moss species, but this system also has unusually high suitability for mosses  of Hypnales and Polytrichales, lichens of Bacidiaceae and Cladoniaceae, and adjacent to the coast, penguins.

Env2_sdm2 Cool dry hill slopes. Occurs mainly in the south Antarctic peninsula, Ellsworth mountains, and western end of the Transantarctic mountains. On the south peninsula, it occurs in association with Env5 (may be quite similar to some Env5 units). Most arid and cold unit in Env2, receiving relatively low snowfall. Unit is higher elevation than its group but not rugged, colder and drier than rest of the subgroup (melt, precip, and temp variables low). In some cases, temp and moisture variables drop below continental average. Sampled biota appear to be mainly mosses, but suitability is lower than continental average for most functional groups, particularly Ochrophytes, Nematodes, and penguins. 

Env2_sdm3 Rugged sparsely vegetated slopes. These systems occur mainly on the west side of the northern Antarctic peninsula with outliers in Marie Byrd land and the Transanarctic Mountains. Maritime influence makes conditions warm with high precipitation like unit 2.1, but they are in windier locations, span a greater climatic range, have a longer growing season (degree-days above -5°C) and there is much less meltwater. The biota is characterised by lichens, mosses and mites, but these systems appear to be unsuitable for rotifers and ochrophytes.

Env2_sdm4 High coastal mountain slopes. Occurs mainly along the highest peaks set back from the coast. Similar to env2_sdm2 but receive a lot more snowfall, and consequently avalanches may be more frequent. Cladonid and Bacidiacid lichens are present but conditions are largely unsuitable for most other groups.

Env3_sdm1. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic mountains, Victoria Land and Dronning Maud land. Unit has especially low cloud and highest wind in the group. Main sampled biota appears to be arthopods (springtails and mites) but Chlorophyta, Nematodes, and lichens are also represented. Suitability appears especially low for many mosses, penguins, and some lichens (Cladoniaceae and Bacidiaceae).

Env3_sdm2 Steep coastal wind-shaded cliffs and mountainsides. Occurs mainly along the Eastern coast of the peninsula and throughout the Transantarctic mountains and Victoria Land. Lowest wind and warmest temps in the group, relatively moist (cloud and precip). Unit is lower than group average but still above continental average in elevation, but higher than both in rugosity and slope. Biota are mainly lichens with some nematodes sampled. 

Env3_sdm3 Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic mountains, Victoria land, and the Prince Charles mountains. May be both coastal and inland.  Does not deviate much from group averages except that it's less cloudy, maybe a tad less rugged than the group average. Most sampled biota are nematodes, but lichens and Entognatha (Arthropods) are also represented. Suitability is low for most functional groups, but Suitability for Ochrophyta and Rotifera is above the continental average, and suitability for Chlorophyta and Nematoda are above the group average. Unit is particularly unsuitable for penguins.

Env3_sdm4 Steep coastal wind-exposed cliffs and mountainsides. Occurs mainly in the North peninsula and western Transantarctic mountains. Cloudier and a bit more rugged than rest of unit and than the continental average. Sampled biota is a mix of nematodes, lichens, mosses, and Arthropods. Suitability is lower than the continental average for all functional groups, but is apparently highest for Ochrophytes and perhaps some lichen groups. 

Env3_sdm5 Inland high mountains. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic mountains and Victoria land. This unit is an extreme example, higher and colder than the unit average. Unit does not occur near the coast. Biota is sparse but consists mainly of lichens, but suitability is below the continental average for all functional groups. The highest suitability is apparently for Ochrophyta. 

Env4_sdm1. Occurs mainly on the eastern coast of the northern peninsula, Dronning Maud land, Enderby land, and in the Prince Charles mountains. This unit is especially windy and high in radiation (North-facing slopes?). Sampled fauna is scarce but consists of lichens, a few mosses and the occasional tardigrade. Suitability is below continental average for all functional groups in Env 4 but this unit nonetheless has higher than continental average suitability for Candelariaceae, Rhizocarpaceae, Acarosporaceae and to a lesser extent Permeliaceae lichens. 

Env4_sdm2. Occurs mainly on the eastern coast of the northern peninsula and in Victoria Land. This unit is on the milder end of the group, with more ruggedness and cloud and less wind/higher temp than the group average, though still high radiation. Most sampled faunas are Rotifers, though singletons of various other groups have been detected. Suitability appears to be especially low for many lichen functional groups (but high for Cladoniaceae and Bacidiaceae) and Trombidiformes (Arachnids) and high for chinstrap penguins and several moss groups.

Env4_sdm3. Occurs mainly in Victoria land, Enderby Land and in the Prince Charles mountains. Its elevation is lower than the rest of the group, but it is especially windy and low in cloud cover (radians are not especially high for the group, possibly due to aspect? East, west, and south-facing slopes?). Sampled biota are exclusively lichens. Though the group has lower suitability than the continental average for all functional groups, this unit nonetheless has higher-than-average suitability for Ochrophytes, Rotifers, and Acarosporaceae lichens.

Env4_sdm4. Mainly occurs in Victoria land with some representation on the eastern coast of the northern peninsula. Unit is lower in cloud and wind than the rest of its group (likely also south-facing?), so a milder version. Sampled biota is scarce and consists mainly of singletons. Most are lichens and cyanobacteria, along with some Ochrophyta and mosses. Suitability above group average but still below continental average for Ochrophyta, Rotifera, Nematoda, and Trombidiformes.

Env4_sdm5. Mainly occurs in Victoria land and Dronning Maud land. Unit is higher elevation, wind, and radiation than the rest of the group, plus lower temp and lower ruggedness. Extremely low sampling but most are Athropods. Suitability is lower than group average for all functional groups except Parmeliaceae lichens, and especially bad for penguins. 

Env5_sdm1 Group 5 consists of high elevation but low wind areas, on average colder and lower precip than the continent. This unit is a mild version of its group, with lower elev and higher temps than the rest of the group. Sampled fauna consists exclusively of lichens. Unit is separated from its group more by suitability; group has low suitability for all functional groups except Ochrophytes, but the unit has exceptionally high suitability for all lichens except Cladoniaceae and Bacidiaceae (for these latter two conditions are only slightly better than usual); all Arthropoda functional groups, and Pottiales mosses.

Env5_sdm2 Very similar to previous unit environmentally; may be slightly colder and higher elevation. Main sampled biota consists of lichens and mosses. Suitability again separates this unit from its group and the previous unit; it has highest suitability for penguins, Cladoniaceae and Bacidaceae lichens, and several functional groups of mosses. 

Env5_sdm3 This unit has higher elev/ruggedness and colder temps than the rest of its group, constituting a more extreme example of the group. Sampled fauna mostly Cyanobacteria and Chlorophyta. Suitability is bad for everything, but slightly less bad for Cladoniaceae, Bacidiaceae, and penguins. 

Env5_sdm4 This unit is higher in elev and lower in temp than the rest of its group (not as high as previous unit). It has especially low cloud cover. Main sampled fauna are Athropods, Nematodes, and Chlorophytes. Suitability terrible for most functional groups except Chlorophyta and Ochrophyta.

Env5_sdm5 This unit is clearer and colder than the rest of its group. Sampled biota mainly Chlorophytes, Cyanobacteria, and lichens. Suitability is low for every group and especially some lichen groups. 

Env6_sdm1 This unit has no abiotic variables due to being on the coast, so most pixels will be low, coastal or islands, and relatively warm. This unit's most sampled biota are adelie penguins and Bryum pseudotriquetum (moss). Ochrophytes are also well-represented. Several Ochrophyte and Athropod species seem to prefer this unit over all others. Suitability is high for all functional groups in this environmental group, especially Mesostimata, Sarcoptiformes, penguins, and Rhizocarpaceae and Parmeliaceae lichens. In this unit, suitability is high especially for Rotifers, Ochrophytes, and several Lichen groups. 

Env6_sdm2 Islands. This unit occurs exclusively on the outer tip of the Antarctic peninsula. It is teeming with penguins, features antarctic hair grass, two moss species, followed by a variety of lichens and arthropods. Snowy Sheathbill is found primarily in this unit., as are gentoo penguins, both vascular plants, and several moss and lichen species. Suitability is high for pretty much everything except Rotifers. This is probably the most habitable unit on the continent. 

Env6_sdm3 Islands. Most common biota is adelie penguins, but also Emperor penguins and south polar skua. Several Arthropod, moss, and lichen species are also present in numbers. It is the most popular ecosystem for several Rotifer species, two Arthropods, and the skua. Suitability is high for everything, especially Arthropod functional groups and Nematodes. 

Env6_sdm4 Islands. Also occurs primarily on the peninsula, and sampling is dominated by penguins (Adelie, gentoo, and chinstrap). Imperial shag and southern giant petrel also present in good numbers. Hair grass and several Arthopod species are also abundant. This is the most popular ecosystem for the imperial shag and many arthropod species. Suitability is low for Ochrophytes and Rotifers but high for basically everything else. 

Env6_sdm5 Islands. Mainly mosses and some common lichens, good representation of Adelies, southern giant petrels, snow petrels, wilsons storm petrels, and antarctic petrels, being the most preferred habitat for the latter three. Several Buellia (lichen) species also prefer this habitat, along with a chlorophyte and two tardigrade species. 

Env6_sdm6 Islands. Adelie, SP skua, Cape petrel, southern fulmar, chinstrap and gentoo pengins dominate along with a variety of moss species.  Suitability low for ochrophytes and rotifers but high for everything else. 

Env6_sdm7 Islands. Pengins are most commonly sampled but several other bird species make an appearance. It is not the favourite of any species. Several mosses and a common lichen group dominate the sampled flora. Low suitability for rotifers but high for everything else, particularly Mesostigmata (arthopod), Rhizocarpaceae (lichen), chlorophytes, and Parmeliaceae (lichen).