env1_sdm1, Snowy mild low-midland slopes. These systems occur mainly in the coastal Antarctic Peninsula, with outliers in Marie Byrd Land, Enderby Land, and in the Transantarctic Mountains. Mainly occurring below 1200m, they may have gentle to quite steep slopes and typically exhibit thick snow cover. Maritime influence makes conditions mild and cloudy with by far the highest total precipitation in the typology, but they are in windier locations, span a greater climatic range, have a longer growing season (degree-days above -5°C), and occur on average at the lowest elevations in the group. The biota is characterised by common lichens, mosses and springtails, with some incidence of antarctic hair grass and pearlwort. These systems appear to be unsuitable for rotifers and ochrophytes.

env1_sdm2, TBD. May need to merge with Env1_sdm4, however, unit has slightly longer growing season, cloudier, and main sampled biota are mosses instead of lichens.

env1_sdm3, Cool dry midland inclines. Occurs mainly in the southern Antarctic peninsula, Ellsworth mountains, and the Transantarctic mountains with outliers in Enderby Land and Victoria Land. It is characterised by relatively gentle terrain though it may encompass low ridges. On the southern Peninsula, it dominates the gentler nunataks and occurs in association with env4_sdm2 where slopes are sunnier or steeper. Unit is relatively low elevation and the least rugged in its group. Its terrain is reminiscent of Env5 units but not as arid, though unit is dry relative to Env1, receiving relatively low snowfall and meltwater. In some cases, temp and moisture variables drop below continental average. Sampled biota appear to be mainly lichens, but suitability is lower than continental average for Nematodes and Chlorophytes. 

env1_sdm4, Meltwater-eroded mid-highland mountain slopes. Occurs mainly in the rugged areas of Alexander and Adelaide Islands and on the inland peninsula with some outliers elsewhere. Terrain and elevation may be quite variable, but unit is characterised by high snowfall and melt. Very similar to env1_sdm2, but with slightly less wind [potential to merge?? Both are also relatively small ecosystems]. Maritime influence makes these systems somewhat warmer and wetter than others within the Env1 group, and they also have greater relief and higher exposure to meltwater at lower elevations. Sampled biota includes mainly common lichens and various chlorophytes, occasional mosses and cyanobacteria. Suitability is low for most functional groups, but higher than the continental average of Bacidiacid and Cladonid lichens as well as feather mosses. 

env1_sdm5, Inland mossy sheltered slopes/ridges. Occurs primarily in North Victoria Land and McMurdo region with other occurrences throughout the Transantarctic Mountains, Ellsworth Mountains, and on the Antarctic Peninsula. Usually characterised by moderate slopes and elevations above 1000m, it is the coldest and driest unit in the relatively moisture-rich Env1, with lower melt, cloud, and snowfall than the other units, likely because its occurrences are concentrated inland and at higher elevations. It has gentler terrain (low slope and rugosity) and is relatively sheltered from wind. Its main sampled biota is common mosses with a scattering of common lichens. Its suitability is low for all functional groups with respect to the rest of Env1. 

env2_sdm1, Dry midland escarpments. Occurs all around Antarctica, with concentrations in South Victoria Land, Dronning Maud Land and the Transantarctic mountains. Characterised by steep, shadowed slopes, this unit may be found in close association with sunlit Env4 units where light conditions vary due to aspect. Unit is the lowest elevation, warmest and windiest unit in Env2 (which is the steepest and shadiest group). Suitability is higher than the group for nearly all functional groups but still below continental average in most cases, excepting some lichen groups and Algae.

env2_sdm2, High mountain crags. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains and Ellsworth Mountains, with a scattering in the peninsula and elsewhere. Typically well removed from the coast, it is the highest elevation unit in the typology and the coldest, highest cloud and snowfall unit in Env2. It is mainly characterised by shadowed, extremely steep, high elevation rocky surfaces. Sampled biota are mainly lichens, though occasional arthropods, chlorophytes, cyanobacteria, and nematodes have been found. 

env2_sdm3, Sheltered dry highland escarpments. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains and Victoria Land, as well as the central and southern Antarctic Peninsula. Its surfaces are usually quite steep, shadowed, and may be topped by sheer cliff, but sheltered from prevailing wind. Sampling is nearly absent, and suitability is low for nearly all functional groups, though it is above the group average for Bacidiacid and Cladonid lichens and several mosses.

env2_sdm4, Highland clear arid mountain slopes. Occurs mainly in Victoria Land, the Transantarctic Mountains and Dronning Maud Land. Usually set well back from the coast and removed from maritime influence, this cold (mean temperatures typically below -25 degrees) unit occurs mainly above 1500m and exhibits the lowest snowfall and cloud cover in its group. Terrain may be moderate to quite steep. Sampled biota are scarce but include mostly lichens and mosses. Suitability is low for all functional groups. 

env2_sdm5, Mid-highland dry mountain slopes. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic mountains, Victoria land, and the Prince Charles mountains. May be both coastal and inland but has low snowfall. The least rugged unit in Env2, it may nonetheless have moderate to steep slopes. Most sampled biota are nematodes, but lichens, algae, and Arthropods are also represented. Suitability is low for most functional groups, but Suitability for Rotifera is above the group average. Unit is particularly unsuitable for penguins.

env3_sdm1, Low arid slopes and outcrops. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains, Victoria Land, and the Antarctic Peninsula, but incidence is rare and patchy. Occurs where undulating, rolling, or craggy terrain is found at low to mid elevations near the coast or near ice shelf. Often but not always found in coastal inlets. Often occurs transitionally between ecosystems in Env3 and more rugged groups. [Possibility to merge into unit 3.4] Unit has lowest solar radiation and highest rugosity in the group. Sampled biota is dominated by common lichens. May be favoured by Cladonid and Bacidiacid lichens. 

env3_sdm2, Mild coastal inclines and beaches. Occurs mainly in the coastal Antarctic peninsula and Marie Byrd land. Rocky, gently sloping lowlands in warm, cloudy mesic (high melt and snowfall) areas has seasonal snow cover and usually exhibits meltwater erosion channels. This unit supports a rich biota dominated mainly by lichens, mosses and seabirds. Colonies of penguins on the lower slopes and nesting seabirds influence moss beds upslope enriched by nutrients via updrafts. Grasses occur occasionally within this system at low elevations on the Antarctic Peninsula and associated islands, but not in other areas. The microbiota is likely to exhibit strong regional variation within this unit around the continent. Based on sampling, appears to be the most favoured ecosystem for several species of seabirds (terns, gulls, petrels), lichens, mosses, mites, and springtails. A favoured nesting environment on the Peninsula for the Southern Giant Petrel, which has been sampled in large numbers. This unit has the highest sampling of 102 relatively common species (at least 10 occurrences), and 20 of these are found in this unit for more than 50% of their samples.

env3_sdm3, Dry lowland lichen fields. Patchy occurrences all around Antarctica, but most iconic example is the Vestfold hills. Also encompasses Seymour Island. Primarily occurs on flat, rocky terrain or low outcrops on cold, dry and windy coastlines (though there are occasional occurrence inland), commonly (but not exclusively) adjacent to ice shelves. Characteristic biota includes several moss, lichen, and arthopod species recorded primarily from this unit (note this is biased due to extensive sampling throughout the Vestfold Hills), though penguins and seabirds are also commonly sampled. Nutrient fluxes potentially influenced by Emperor penguin colonies on adjacent ice sheets. Suitability is high for all functional groups.

env3_sdm4, Xeric valley flanks. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains (particularly the McMurdo Dry Valleys area) and Victoria Land. Sloped or rolling valley sides or low outcrops in valleys typically carved by antecedent glaciers and transitioning to steeper cliffs and high peaks. The valleys may extend many kilometres inland and are strongly sheltered from the wind and extremely dry. Some incidence of this unit also seen between the edge of existing glaciers and steeper mountain slopes. These systems are colder than the rest of the lowlands, but still warmer than the continental average. The vegetation is sparse due to extremely dry conditions, which are largely unsuitable for mosses, and instead characterised mainly by Lecanorid and Teloschistid lichens with high suitability for Stereocaulid lichens, nematodes, trombidiformid mites, rotifers, green algae, and springtails.

env3_sdm5, Rocky flatlands and valley floors. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains and Victoria Land with a scattering of sites on the Peninsula, Marie Byrd land, and Eastern Antarctica. Cold despite lower elevations, little snowfall but often contains lakes maintained by meltwater streams. Slopes level and may be undulating. Sampled mainly springtails, mites, nematodes, and certain lichens. Suitability also high for rotifers.

env3_sdm6, Sheltered dry low-midland plateaus. Occurs mainly in the Transantarctic Mountains and on James Ross Island, with scattered incidence elsewhere. Prominent on the raised shelves above the McMurdo Dry Valleys, this is the highest elevation and coldest unit in Env3, with gentle slopes and typically sheltered from wind. Primary sampled biota are nematodes, with springtails, mites, and lichens also well-represented. Suitability is higher than most of ice-free Antarctica for all functional groups, though lower than in the rest of Env3, which is relatively mild. 

env3_sdm7, Subcoastal exposed mossy outcrops. These mossy ecosystems occupy low-relief rocky outcrops in the subcoastal hinterlands or directly on the coastline. Conditions are sufficiently warm and sunny to promote moss growth, but windier than other coastal systems in Env3, leading to presence of aeolian (wind-eroded) contours. Several processes are likely to enhance habitat suitability for mosses by promoting nutrient enrichment. Many occurrences co-incide with abandoned penguin colonies that were active earlier in the Holocene when sea levels were higher than at present. Toxic nitrogen levels associated with active colonies have since been leached, while residual levels of N and other nutrients promote moss growth. Alternatively, more elevated sites receive nutrient influxes from nesting seabirds or aerosol inputs via updrafts from extant penguin colonies below. While mosses are often conspicuous features of these systems, lichens and some nematodes are also widespread, they are popular with snow petrels, Wilson's storm petrels, and several cyanobacteria species are characteristic of occurrences in different regions of the continent. 

env4_sdm1, Sunny bare low-midland hillslopes/screes. Concentrated in Dronning Maud Land, on the Antarctic Peninsula and in North Victoria Land. One of the sunniest units on the continent, this relatively mild north-facing ecosystem may exhibit medium to steep craggy slopes eroded by meltwater channels and may be exposed to prevailing wind. It is primarily coastal except in DM Land. It is the lowest/warmest, windiest unit in Env4. In DM Land, the unit often occurs alternating with Env2_sdm1 or Env5_sdm5 (depending on elevation and ruggedness) where light conditions are variable due to topography and aspect, with this unit representing well-lit surfaces. On the Peninsula, it may alternate similarly with lowland Env3 units and is prominently free of snow in summer (see photos). Primary sampled biota are mosses, but lichens and petrels also common. Suitability relatively high for most lichens, mosses, algae, and arthropods.

env4_sdm2, Sunny sheltered midland hillslopes/screes. Concentrated on the Antarctic Peninsula with some incidence in North Victoria land and scattered occurrences elsewhere. Typically exhibiting medium to steep rocky slopes that are eroded by meltwater channels, this mild low-midland unit is often found in association with env1_sdm1 on the Peninsula, with this unit facing north with meltwater channels in evidence and 1.1 facing south with thick snow cover. Wettest (high snowfall and melt) and warmest in Env4, with high solar radiation. Terrain is similar to 4.1 but sheltered from the prevailing wind. Sampled biota are scarce but suitability is high for Bacidiacid and Cladonid lichens, most mosses, mites, and springtails.

env4_sdm3, Sunny mid-highland arid inclines/hillslopes. Occurs primarily in the Transantarctic Mountains, Victoria Land, Prince Charles Mountains and Enderby Land. Typically characterised by sunny, smooth, low to medium grade slopes, this unit lacks the prominent meltwater erosion channels seen in 4.1 and 4.2. It has the lowest snowfall/melt, low cloud and some wind exposure, so it is the most arid unit in Env4. Its surface may have soil or loose rocks. Sampled biota mostly mosses and lichens, but springtails have also been collected. Suitability is generally low for most functional groups except rotifers.

env4_sdm4, Sunny dry highland sheltered nunatak faces. Predominantly found in North and South Victoria land, with notable incidences in the Transantarctic Mountains and the southern Antarctic Peninsula. Exhibiting medium to steep-grade slopes, this unit is the highest unit on average in Env4 and is usually sheltered from prevailing wind. Though usually too steep to hold snow, surfaces are sometimes partly buried by deep snow banks [speculative: snow banks built up in the lee of the wind e.g. blown over from windy side of ridges to bury this ecosystem?]. Surfaces are also too steep to hold rocks or soil and are therefore typically bare rock faces. Sampled biota are lichens (Parmeliaceae dominant) and mosses (Bryales). Suitability is generally low for all functional groups.

env4_sdm5, Sunny dry mid-highland sheltered mountain slopes. Predominantly found in North and South Victoria Land, with notable incidences in the Transantarctic Mountains and the northern Antarctic Peninsula. Typically exhibiting smooth mid- to steep-grade slopes that may nonetheless hold some soil or screes, this unit has low snowfall, but also lowest solar radiation in Env4 (still well above average), and low wind. It is frequently found in association with env2_sdm5 where topography and aspect result in varying light conditions. It is dominant on the north-facing mountainsides above the McMurdo dry valleys. Sampled biota are mainly lichens and mosses. Suitability generally average or low for all functional groups. 

env4_sdm6, Sunny mid-highland arid exposed nunatak faces and mountain slopes. Occurrences concentrated in Dronning Maud land and Victoria Land. Typically exhibiting mid to steep-grade slopes, this clear unit is otherwise similar in terrain to 4.3 (e.g. smoother surfaces with little evidence of meltwater erosion) though it occurs at higher elevations on average. It is the coldest in Env4 and windy. Scarce biota consists mostly of lichens and suitability is low for all functional groups.

env5_sdm1, Windy overcast nunatak fringes (pediments?). Mainly occurs in Dronning Maud Land, but also appears in the Ellsworth Mountains and the southern end of the Transantarctic Mountains. This dry unit generally occurs around the low-relief fringes of rugged nunataks, a lower elevation, warmer counterpart to env5_sdm5. The unit has the highest cloud cover in Env5. Sampled biota are scarce but include lichens, nematodes, occasional mosses and arthropods. Suitability low for almost all functional groups except algae and potentially Candelarid lichens.

env5_sdm2, Windy clear remote plateaus and nunatak fringes. Relatively rare unit that occurs in Dronning Maud Land, the Transantarcic Mountains, Price Charles Mountains, and Ellsworth Mountains. Primarily associated with windy, flat to rolling dry terrain at high elevations removed from maritime influence, and may be sloping gently. This unit is usually transitional between other Env5 units, with similar terrain. Snowfall is relatively high compared to the group, despite remoteness from coast, which may improve suitability for some species. Samples are scarce but dominated by springtails, also scattered mosses, nematodes, cyanobacteria, and chlorophytes. Suitability in this unit is generally low for everything.

env5_sdm3, Windy midland meltwater plateaus. Scattered occurrences in the Transantarctic Mountains, Dronning Maud Land, Victoria Land, and the Prince Charles Mountains. Primarily associated with windy, flat to rolling terrain at a mid-range of elevations, sometimes near to the coast, and may be sloping gently. May include both the top of plateaus and the gentle slopes under any escarpments. Though this unit is dry, it has the highest melt and lowest elevation in Env5 and is likely to be eroded by limited seasonal meltwater flow, unlike the rest of its group. Scarce sampled biota are mainly lichens and green algae. Suitability is below continental average for all functional groups, but substantially higher than the group average for nearly all groups, particularly Bacidiacid and Cladonid lichens and all moss groups.

env5_sdm4, Windy remote clear xeric plateaus. Predominantly occurs far from the coast in the Transantarctic Mountains, Victoria Land, Dronning Maud Land and the Prince Charles Mountains. Primarily associated with windy, flat to undulating terrain at high elevations removed from maritime influence and may be sloping gently. Also occurs sloping out of the ice sheet or away from the fringes of glaciers. May include both the top surface of the plateau and the gentle slopes under any escarpments. This unit is closely associated with steep units in Env 2 and 4 which separate plateau and cliff-foot slopes. It is the coldest unit in the typology (mean annual Temp -30 degrees), and the clearest, and lowest snowfall unit in Env5. Several species of Ochrophytes have been sampled but all are singletons. Suitability is lower than continental and group average for all functional groups. 

env5_sdm5, Windy highland clear nunatak fringes (pediments?). Predominantly found in Dronning Maud Land, relatively minor occurrences in the Transantarctic Mountains and Victoria Land. This unit is primarily associated with high elevations but relatively gentle topography, and is typically found on the gentler fringes of nunataks particularly in DM Land. It often skirts units from Env2 and Env4, which form the more rugged nunatak peaks. This is the highest elevation unit in Env5. Scarce sampled biota includes mostly lichens. Suitability is lower than continental and group average for all functional groups.  